Return-Path: <speakup+bounces-1353-lists+speakup=lfdr.de@linux-speakup.org>
X-Original-To: lists+speakup@lfdr.de
Delivered-To: lists+speakup@lfdr.de
Received: from befuddled.reisers.ca (befuddled.reisers.ca [206.248.184.127])
	by mail.lfdr.de (Postfix) with ESMTP id 8991AB55E3A
	for <lists+speakup@lfdr.de>; Sat, 13 Sep 2025 06:14:03 +0200 (CEST)
Received: by befuddled.reisers.ca (Postfix, from userid 65534)
	id C5B97383102; Sat, 13 Sep 2025 00:13:59 -0400 (EDT)
Received: from befuddled.reisers.ca (localhost [127.0.0.1])
	by befuddled.reisers.ca (Postfix) with ESMTP id A93863830B0
	for <lists+speakup@lfdr.de>; Sat, 13 Sep 2025 00:13:59 -0400 (EDT)
X-Original-To: speakup@linux-speakup.org
Delivered-To: speakup@linux-speakup.org
Received: by befuddled.reisers.ca (Postfix, from userid 65534)
	id 987C8382C96; Sat, 13 Sep 2025 00:13:55 -0400 (EDT)
Received: from atlas.bondproducts.com (atlas.bondproducts.com [23.24.6.165])
	by befuddled.reisers.ca (Postfix) with ESMTP id 613B0382C85
	for <speakup@linux-speakup.org>; Sat, 13 Sep 2025 00:13:55 -0400 (EDT)
Received: from users.shellworld.net (users.shellworld.net [50.116.47.71])
	by atlas.bondproducts.com (Postfix) with ESMTP id D41F944FC6;
	Sat, 13 Sep 2025 00:13:50 -0400 (EDT)
Received: by users.shellworld.net (Postfix, from userid 1005)
	id 072C51001B6; Sat, 13 Sep 2025 00:13:47 -0400 (EDT)
Received: from localhost (localhost [127.0.0.1])
	by users.shellworld.net (Postfix) with ESMTP id 0430C100090;
	Sat, 13 Sep 2025 00:13:47 -0400 (EDT)
Date: Sat, 13 Sep 2025 00:13:46 -0400 (EDT)
From: Karen Lewellen <klewellen@shellworld.net>
To: Jookia <contact@jookia.org>
cc: Chime Hart <chime@hubert-humphrey.com>, 
    Cleverson Casarin Uliana <clul+speakup@posteo.com.br>, 
    speakup@linux-speakup.org
Subject: Re: Question about blind CLI use (was Re: "your browser is not
 supported anymore" ...)
In-Reply-To: <aMOwSwrEWTBtFn60@titan>
Message-ID: <Pine.LNX.4.64.2509130007500.3861565@users.shellworld.net>
References: <202509111603.58BG3W3p018143@nfbcal.org>
 <7a04c6dd-c761-4445-b53a-3c4525cf2a87@crosslink.net>
 <579c5d9b-5ba1-4029-982a-01295fea3a61@posteo.com.br>
 <Pine.LNX.4.64.2509112223130.3830807@users.shellworld.net>
 <6d3f190e-733a-e5d5-a8f5-cc6eb2c05e65@hubert-humphrey.com>
 <Pine.LNX.4.64.2509120106350.3832376@users.shellworld.net> <aMOwSwrEWTBtFn60@titan>
X-BeenThere: speakup@linux-speakup.org
Precedence: list
List-Id: "Speakup is a screen review system for Linux."
 <speakup.linux-speakup.org>
List-Unsubscribe: <mailto:speakup+unsubscribe@linux-speakup.org>
List-Post: <mailto:speakup@linux-speakup.org>
List-Help: <mailto:speakup+help@linux-speakup.org>
List-Subscribe: <mailto:speakup+subscribe@linux-speakup.org>
MIME-Version: 1.0
Content-Type: TEXT/PLAIN; charset=US-ASCII; format=flowed
X-Bogosity: Ham, tests=bogofilter, spamicity=0.000000, version=1.2.5

Hi Jookia,
Your questions are fine ones.
This is a very detailed reply, with my hoping you find my
personal perspective helpful.
In fact, let me start there.
No matter how well intended, no one on this list can speak for
any other person's choices but their own.
One unfortunate thing about the sight loss experience, about many
disability experiences in general is the assumption that there
are two sides.  Blind / sighted for example.  Likewise the idea
that all sharing the experience in question are interchangeable
for one another.  As in most blind people or most sighted people.
Use the search tool of your choice and you will discover just how
many people live with the sight loss experience.  Some sources
like the World Health Organization put the number above 1
billion.
Life experiences, training, location in the world, all those
factors impact how a person individually chooses to accommodate.
And, speaking personally, the more choices on the table the
better.
Now to some of your more specific questions.
My answers start with KL.


I don't meant to hijack this thread but I'm a sighted person
who's been struggling to try and make the world a bit better with
accessibility stuff.

KL: May you live for many decades for making such a choice.  I
believe the person most associated with at least one Linux screen
reader, Samuel, also does not personally use his own tool.
Another bit of population data for you as well.
Screen readers are also used by individuals experiencing many of
the various learning disabilities.  Where letters numbers or both
appear upside down or backwards or both.  Additionally many
experiencing cognitive disabilities find them helpful as well.
I share this to show just how broad your contribution can be.  At
least, speaking personally, if you think of the broader audience
for your creative genius.


  I haven't really done anything useful yet, but I've spent a lot
of time talking to sighted people who scoff at the idea of people
using
'old' technology or being left behind because of their workflows.

KL:   I am being philosophical here a bit.  Is it really old
technology if the person using it is being productive as they
define the term?
Speaking very personally, one misunderstanding I encounter, one
of many truth be told about adaptive technology comes from how it
is chosen and used.  In many cases adaptive technology serves as
an extension of, if not a substitution for a physical body
function and activity.  Hands, eyes, ears, voices and so forth.
Just as there is human individuality in say a Saturday morning
Soccer player and hmmm Nessie, there is human individuality in
how adaptive tools are applied.
More importantly though?  Just as you use the same hands or eyes,
or ears to do a number of tasks, many using adaptive technology
seek to find a tool that lets them do the same.
Provide a consistent and reliable path to reading or writing or
banking and so forth.  You do not shop with one pair of hands,
and bank with another, does that resonate?



I know this is the speakup list and I'm talking to an extremely
niche
community here, but I'm genuinely interested to know: Why do you
use
computers this way instead of like Windows or macOS? They can do
much
more useful tasks.

KL: Well..yes and no.
First, thanks for respecting how mixed your audience is here,
including those experiencing blindness.
Tasks are a fine way to illustrate what may feed the reasoning
for some here.
While there have only been two major apple screen reader tools,
Outspoken and voiceover, Microsoft resisted incorporating
accessibility into windows for quite some time.  DOS too for that
mater.  Many third party companies filled in the gap, creating
tools that, in those days, included allot of features that the
individual could customize for themselves.  Speech rate,
inflection, how numbers and punctuation was managed.  Ways to
monitor background and foreground changes, size of text and so
forth.
Then folks needed to use the Internet, where site development
itself was based on rules.
Progressive enhancement web design remains the most inclusive. It
lets you build a floor, say concrete, in Basic Html, then put all
the JavaScript on top you want.
You in your sneakers and I in my high heels can equally reach the
store..no one needs to claim everyone with my label is wearing
say Jimmy shoes either in order to be accommodated.
Instead individuals choose what works for them to manage the
task..not most blind people, required.  Such, speaking
personally, does not exist in reality anyway.
Some of those environments do not manage things like Braille or
print size changes very well.  Changing yes, but unfortunately
again those experiencing print disabilities suffer from poor
public relations.  And, again, the you meet one blind person you
have met them all, along side the as a blind person I speak for
the hundreds of millions of others.
Cost plays a role, training plays a role too.  Where a person
lives in the world as well.
For decades in North America at least, many of the third party
companies bridging the windows DOS and Apple gap also trained, in
person, users in the products they sold too.
The result, speaking personally, is allot of diversity.
For some people who began in windows, using their windows tools
and windows like understanding of computing feels most natural. 
For some with the access to both tools and training Apple items
provide the same.
For me personally?  I began using DOS in 1988. I still use DOS
today as my main system. I reach a Linux Shell for my Linux
exposure.
There is no existing Linux screen reader that would accommodate
my combination of experiences.  Either because the speech quality
is poor, or physically harmful.  Or because it takes longer to
manage tasks, with less successful results.
In my case though, the same is true for windows.
I might be able to use an apple environment, but it would not
likely be IOS.Recently I managed to locate the one Macbook pro
with the speech factors I require..it took more than a decade.
Now I have to find in person training, talent for which I will
gladly pay.
One soul's workflow and technology is another soul's
productivity.
The lack of in person training, speaking personally, impacts
those new to the sight loss experience too, regardless of system,
windows, Apple, or Linux.



I've thought for a while that this is simply because Linux has
dropped
the ball hard with GUI accessibility,

KL: Depends on who you ask, but speaking personally this is part
of the problem. Poor speech when compared to hardware for
example.  Again though? Its the lack of in person Linux training
I feel speaking personally.
It can take several lines of commands and keystrokes even in GUI 
Linux to accomplish what can be managed comparatively in cli.
Perhaps a greater goal would be improving the CLI tools, even L Y
N x can manage some JavaScript links if they are well written. 
Links the chain has some basic JavaScript. I use a DOS  port
of that browser at places like amazon.
Elinks could provide even greater choices..its not just about
text in the command line after all.

but I'm starting to wonder if it's
really just because GUIs suck for blind people altogether.

KL: speaking personally, that generalization is neither fair or
correct.
The fact that there is no such universal thing as blind people
aside, I would invite you to spend time with someone really solid
in Voiceover..and there are millions of them.
Lists like mac visionaries, goodness even a phone conversation
with apple's talented accessibility team..a resource that does
not exist for Linux.

I know that
screen readers themselves are kind of a nightmare for me to use
with
having to remember a ton of buttons, but having to tab through a
GUI
just to do things I could type is a headache.

KL: I am personally curious just what and where you have tried
these tools?
Again, training is the key here.  Apple incorporates keystrokes,
not so much for accessibility, but for speed and efficiency. 
Practice using the keystrokes just like practice playing the
piano makes you Billy Joel smiles.
I still use keystrokes but I have been using a computer for
several decades.  One thing I personally dislike about other
screen reader tools is having to take my hands off the main
keyboard for information. One does not necessarily need to do
this with the mac either.

Maybe text is just a
better interface if you're blind?

KL: no. Or it depends on how you define blindness.  For a braille
user, with an interface or a display?  Most likely, I cannot say
personally. I am in the blindness majority who are not braille
users.
Allot depends on how well things are labeled, and how well one
can reach those things, but this is true in graphical
environments.
Some has to do with how well things are coded, in ways that allow
them to be spoken..but this can be done with graphics too.
And, once again, many populations benefit from less clutter with
clearly labeled items and ease of navigation voice browsers are a
thing too, with speech provided as well.
Speaking personally you might find it more helpful to think less
about the stereotype..they have little basis in reality.


  It's certainly more precise and
quicker. But I'm also aware there are things like hardware
limitations
like systems not supporting hardware synths any more.
KL: Well yes and no.  One can still find systems with
motherboards with the proper ports.
Speaking personally, in both Linux and Windows, the issue is
rooted in these generalizations and stereotypes.  That no *real
blind person* would use hardware anymore, when the speech quality
alone for many would make that untrue.
As with allot of things, one must know where to look for such
systems if that resonates.
For me personally, I have never encountered issues finding
computers with the capacity to support my hardware synthesizers
of choice.  The challenge has been finding drivers in other
systems, including Linux.  Largely because, as I understand it,
people assume that the one blind person they have met who does
not want hardware represents the hundreds of millions who might
choose differently if they could.


So I'm genuinely curious as to why you work the way you do.
KL: Because it gets my work done. Keeps me employed, is faster,
is actually physically safer in some factors, and so forth.
Because no alternatives at all exist for me in either command
line Linux as a system at all, let alone GUI  Linux.
Innovation leading to Dos ports of some Linux and other tools
provides me with paths to Linux shells for things I find less
available in my DOS  desktop..but that can change, see my comment
below.

---

As a kind of side note, my current project is making an emulated
serial to speech synth API for the DOSBox-X emulator.

KL: May I ask why you are using Dosbox instead of freedos?

Www.freedos.org

Not only is the system developed regularly to harmonize DOS
simplicity with graphical tools, you would find partners in your
efforts.
In addition to the avenue you are trying, there is some effort
involving using raspberry pi kits as the hardware.  For those who
do not have synths.  Further, more than a few members globally
who still have existing hardware feel a few coding elements will
allow them better, more understandable speech than that provided
by the software elements.

  I aim to implement
just enough of the DECTalk protocol to work with DOS screen
readers and
speakup, then pass that to SAPI/NVDA or speech-dispatcher/espeak.

  KL: Again I encourage connecting with freedos instead.  Linux is
not the only foundation for this effort.

  I do
have pipe dream plans of turning this in to a USB espeak synth
that
could be used to read early boot messages and panics on Linux.

KL:   There is an existing USB synth the dEctalk USB that at
least, as I understand it, can provide good speech quality. 
Additionally, some Raspberry PI hardware kits might help here.
Has been under discussion on the freedos development list..might
not be that hard of a pipe dream.

But more widely I've just been thinking about how to make an
application
like DOSBox-X accessible that relies on a little fake GUI for its
configuration menu.

KL: really?   I am still wondering what makes Dosbox a better
choice than freedos?


At first I thought of adding support for AccessKit
and Orca/NVDA. But that only works on some systems, and it's hard
to
test and convince developers to test. They won't notice when it
breaks.


KL: perhaps it is how they get asked?  Although, speaking
personally, Orca has its own problems..as you say only works on
some systems.
Still, that is what makes personal computers pc in the first
place.

It also kind of sucks to use as you have to tab through
everything.

KL: instead of using the arrow keys?
No search command that lets you jump to where you are needed?  No 
items are numbered possibilities?

So I've kind of been more interested in adding a new interface a
bit
like a command line or menu-based system, with output by TTS or
Braille.
It would live in the application, be usable by sighted people too
and be
easy for developers to test and reason about.

KL: Once more I focus you on the numbers.  Tools that intended to
support those experiencing learning disabilities still
incorporate speech.  Do not confuse tts with screen reader
functions.  A good screen reader provides more than just reading
the text on the screen.
This is not a tangent, but may I ask where you are in the world?
In Toronto, there is a venture capital firm specializing in
supporting development of tools that benefit all populations. 
They understand that it is not a two sides of a coin reality.
Instead combining many ways to manage screen content helps
everyone, regardless of how they use their screens.  Does that
resonate?

So if you have any feedback about any of this please tell me.

KL: Jookia, there is allot in my reply.
I can speak for no one but myself, such is true for everyone
here.  Still I feel broadening your dictionary and choice of
resources might make all this less confusing and more fun.

Jookia.

Karen



